So remember we're talking about
outliers and leverage points.
This idea of just calling something
an outlier is actually very vague.
And what we're going to try and
do in this lecture is make these
terms a little bit more precise.
So just to remind ourselves outliers
can be the result of real or
spurious processes.
Obviously if it's a spurious process
we want to remove that point from our
fitted model and
if it's part of a real process,
we don't want to get rid of a point and
pretend like it never happened.
And we talked about last time with
a picture that outliers can conform to
the regression relationship where they can
not conform to the regression relationship
and there's various ways we can poke and
prod at outliers to ascertain how much
influence they have,
how much potential influence they have.
So a fairly complete
laundry list of default
diagnostic measures that
you have can be done
by the R command ?influence.measures and
this will give you just a laundry list of
potential influence
measures that you can use.
The rstudent in rstandard are just
different variations of residuals.
One of the problems with residuals
is that they are unit specific.
The residuals have the same unit.
If our Y is measured in pounds,
then our residuals are in pounds, okay.
So they're not necessarily comparable
across settings, and you can't for
example just set a threshold and
say here's my residual threshold.
What would be nice if you
wanted to ascertain whether or
not something was an outlier it
would be nice if you could just say,
oh if it has a residual bigger
than four declare it an outlier.
That would be something
like an outlier test.
Well we need to have a test or a good
distribution to compare the residuals to.
The rstudent and the rstandard
are attempts to standardize the residuals.
Basically divide by an appropriate
standard error measure.
And there's a slight
distinction between whether or
not they're internally standardized or
externally standardized which
basically amounts to whether or
not you've deleted the point or
not deleted the point when
calculating the standard error.
This has impact to whether or
not the standardized residual
follows a T distribution or not.
I don't find a great that'll help in the
distinction between the standardized and
non-standardized residuals, I'm sorry,
the internally versus externally
standardized residuals.
I do like to use
the standardized residuals,
because they are on a nicer scale.
I tend to look at them with respect
to the overall cloud of data,
rather than try to set strict thresholds.
The hat values are another
useful diagnostic measure.
These are merely a measure of influence.
So if you think back to our plot,
if we had a cloud of data.
A point that fell kind of
far away from the X values.
That point had high leverage.
But that didn't speak whether or not you'd
actually chose to exert that leverage.
Well, leverage is just a measure of that.
How, kind of, far outlined it is,
from the collection of exits.
The further it is,
the more leverage it has.
Now, if we just have one X,
it's easy to visualize that.
If we have lots of Xs in a multi-variable
regression, it's hard to visualize.
And then stuff like hatvalues
become very useful.
One way which hatvalues are tremendously
useful is in finding data entry errors.
So you might look through your collection
of rows of your data and
look at the associated hatvalues.
One hatvalue per row in your model.
And if you see some that
are extremely large not
only would they potentially impact your
model, but you should look at that row to
ascertain whether there
was a data entry error.
And then we get to how do we
measure things like influence?
Actual influence,
not just the potential for influence.
Well almost all of the influence measures
follow along the following line.
Take out that data point,
refit the model, and
then compare to whatever aspect of
the model you're thinking about
what happened between having the data
point in and having the data point out.
So dffits, for every data point,
sees how much the fitted value
at that X value changes depending on
whether or not that point was included.
The dfbetas look specifically
at the slope coefficients.
How much do the slope coefficients change?
Whether or not that particular
data point is included.
So for the dffits we get one dffit
per data point for the dfbetas.
We get one, we get a dfbeta for
every coefficient for every data points.
So if we have a model, a linear regression
model, we have two coefficients,
the intercept and then the slope term.
So our dfbetas will be a matrix of
two by the number of datapoints.
Cooks.distance is just an overall
change in our coefficients.
It summarizes the dfbetas in a sense.
Resid the function resid returns
the ordinary residuals and
then there's a really nice way to get
the kind of cross validated residuals out.
So the idea again is to
leave out the data point,
and then look at the predicted Y
value at that X value, whether that
data point was included in the fit versus
when it was not included in the fit.
That is the so-called PRESS residuals.
So the sum of the square press
residuals is like the leave
one out cross validated error.
And what's interesting in linear
regression is you don't actually have to
refit the model.
For none of these things do you
actually have to refit the model.
There's linear algebra relationships that
can get exploited so they're very fast.
And here, I just show you that if you
take the residuals and divide by one
minus the hat values, you actually
get these so called PRESS residuals.
The PRESS residuals are less specifically
useful for detecting outliers and
determining influence then they are for
ascertaining things like module fit, okay?
But I just put it here
because it's related.
So let me just give a couple of words
about how I used these things before we
then go into some computer experiments.
So the first thing is I'm not a big fan of
simple rules like thresholding rules maybe
if you have giant data sets and automated
systems you need to get involved in that.
But for me if you're kind of
digging deep into a data analysis,
you really want to not think of these in
terms of simple thresholding rules for
declaring things an outlier.
You want to kind of take
a more wholistic approach.
Look at the collective residuals
relative to the other residuals.
Look at the collection of path values
relative to the other path values.
And some of the measures,
some of these diagnostic measures
don't have meaningful absolute scales.
And they might depend for
example even standardized versions
might depend on the sample size.
An important aspect of all these measures
is that they probe your data to look at
lack of influence, and whether or not
something is an outlier in separate ways.
So you want to really think of them as
diagnostics in the same way a physicians
thinks of diagnostics, sort of poking and
prodding at your data to try and
figure out if there's any problem.
So in residual plots,
the main residual plot
that everyone does always,
is to plot the residuals
verses the fitted values.
In these residual plots, we're just
looking for any systematic pattern.
If there's any systematic
pattern in your residual plot,
that's evidence of some kind of lack of
fit, and we'll go through some examples.
Another plot from the collection plots
I'd shown before is the residual
QQ plot that's trying to
look ascertain normality,
the plot of the leverage values is again,
we've talked about leverage values,
this is just ascertaining that are there
any points that have high leverage.
Then you want to go look at
those rows of data specifically,
maybe there were data entry errors.
And then the influence measures
get to the bottom line.
If I remove this datapoint,
how much does it impact the fitted model,
the coefficients, and so on?
Okay?
So let's just go through some
examples of using these things and
I think you'll get the hang of it and
from this, you can read on these and
other influence measures to incorporate
them in your data analysis.